# Ultrasonic-Sensor-Belt-Project

 According to the world health organization , as of 2010, there are a total of 285 million visually impaired people in the world with 39 million of them being blind. This is truly an immense number and is only expected to increase in the coming years.

  While technology such as smart canes and handheld collision detectors are certainly available to aid those afflicted in certain areas of their life, there are many economically disadvantaged people, possibly living in less developed regions of the world, for whom such technology is simply not viable. This inability to mitigate the negative effects of blindness is a huge deficit for the person afflicted by it. 

 Many seemingly fundamental and ordinary tasks become extraordinary challenges without the ability of sight. Take, for example, entertainment, almost all forms of modern entertainment (except for music) requires sight to enjoy. This can lead to intense boredom when in solitude and social anxiety when in public. Another affected area of the individual’s life is education. Without sight, individuals have difficulty reading or writing and are limited to only one learning type, auditory learning, even when they might not possess an aptitude for it. In addition the loss of sight prevents users from doing other basic tasks effectively such as eating, using the restroom, crossing streets, etc. However, one of the largest problems associated with blindness is the issue of navigation.

  When in a common environment such as a home, blind individuals can familiarize themselves with the layout and traverse it without too much difficulty. Where the difficulty comes in, however, is when blind individuals must traverse a foreign environment in which they are not familiar. This problem is often tackled with solutions such as guide dogs and wheelchair guides, but when traveling solo or when one of these solutions is simply not available, the process of getting from point A to point B in a foreign place can be unimaginably difficult. This is where my project comes in. 

 It is my goal to create a device that can alleviate some of the challenges associated with navigation for the blind while being as discreet and economically affordable as possible. The concept for my product is a belt, kitted with ultrasonic sensors and vibration motors that will provide a 135 degrees collision detection with varying levels of vibrational feedback to indicate direction and strength. The final product will consist of 4 to 5 ultrasonic sensors placed at slightly opposed angles and will employ basic trigonometry to calculate the approximate x and y position of all obstacles relative to the user. The product will then employ further math (composed of basic trigonometry and the distance formula) to figure out the distance and angle of each obstacle respectively.

 Based on this angle measurement, corresponding vibration motors that are situated underneath the belt and pointing in the direction of the obstacle.  will vibrate. The distance measurement will then be converted into a PWM (pulse width modulation) signal that will vary the intensity of the motors based on how near an object is creating an indication of distance for the user. The logic and power circuitry will be housed in a discreet 3D modeled enclosure with a power button for turning on and off when not traveling and a potentiometer for adjusting sensitivity. For demonstration purposes, I plan to create a visual display, in addition to the physical product of course,  using the sensor reading and the Programming (this is the name) programming language in order to visually display sensor reading in terms of angles and distance of encroaching objects. Cumulatively, the end product will be a wide angle, variable intensity collision detection and avoidance system. 

 This proposed product has numerous advantages over those currently on the market. It can detect in a 145-degree (subject to change) arc around the user, it is discrete enough to be worn in public, it does not restrict the usage of the wearer’s hands, and it is equipped with a power button and adjustable sensitivity levels in order to be suitable for many usage scenarios. Most important of all, it is relatively simple, consisting of a microcontroller board,  3 ultrasonic sensors, 6 vibration motors, and a 3d printed bracket. and inexpensive making it accessible to demographics to whom alternatives simply aren’t economically viable. 

 One existing solution is the UltraCane which makes use of dual range narrow beam technology in order to measure accurate distance measurements to a degree that traditional ultrasonic sensors simply cannot. Unfortunately, this device possesses some drawbacks in that it is not wearable because it must be physically held and therefore restricts the user to only using one hand for other tasks. This can potentially prevent more advanced forms of travel such as biking. Additionally, an new UltraCane MSRP’s around 635 euros which deems it inaccessible to individuals in poverty or those living in lesser developed nations. My product hopes to combat this by being both affordable as well as technologically effective. 

 To conclude, my product, if executed correctly, has the ability to completely revolutionize the lives of blind individuals who are economically disadvantages and even drastically improves the lives of those who aren’t due to its simple yet effective nature. 
